LESSON OVERVIEW:
“WHAT IS ‘COMMUNITY’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?”
(This page does not appear on the student copy.)
How does this lesson fit into the unit?
Reading
Lesson 1
Reading
Lesson 2
Reading
Lesson 3
Reading
Lesson 4
Reading
Lesson 5
Reading
Lesson 6
Reading
Lesson 7
Reading
Lesson 8
“What is
‘community’
and why is it
important?”
by T oby Lowe
(Essay)
“How to
Increase Your
Sense of
Belonging”
by Kendra
Cherry
(Informational)
“The White
Umbrella”
by Gish Jen
(Short Story)
“The Stolen
Party”
by Liliana
Heker
(Short Story)
“Where I’m
From”
by Misa
Sugiura
(Short Story)
“Violin”
by Nikki
Wallschlaeger
(Poem)
“Island Rodeo
Queen”
by Yamile Saied
Méndez
(Short Story)
“The War of
the Wall”
by T oni Cade
Bambara
(Short Story)
⬆ You are here! ⬆
Knowledge focus This lesson’s skill focus
This informational text offers a useful and accurate definition for the word
“community” which students will refer to throughout the unit. Students
consider the feelings people associate with their communities and how the
shared narrative of a community influences members’ views.
In this lesson, students practice
determining and summarizing the
central idea of a text and identifying
the details that develop it.
[RI.7.2]
Notes to T eachers
●
●
●
This lesson introduces students to key unit knowledge about community. Students will use the definition of
community outlined in this article throughout the unit.
This lesson is designed to be a whole class lesson because it provides students with more guidance on analyzing
the author’s argument around the definition of community. Use the recommended reading modalities (whole class,
partner, independent) and the During Reading Questions.
During Reading Questions that are marked with an asterisk ( * ) are optional questions. T eachers can choose to
use these questions with students needing more support.
Unit 1: Community and Belonging
Suggested Pacing
Part Lesson Activities Time
Intro Slide
Deck Guide students through the slide deck to introduce them to the reading lesson and skill focus. 5 min
During
Reading
Questions
Students read and answer the During Reading Questions. 15 min
Independent
Practice
Students complete multiple choice questions and a short answer prompt to measure their understanding of the text. 20 min
Student-Led
Discussion
Students practice speaking with academic language as they discuss questions about the text with a partner. 5 min
~45 min total
How do I facilitate this lesson?
Option 1 Option 2 Option 3
T eacher-led,
scaffolded and
supportive
Greater student
independence
Student-led,
small groups
●
Use the recommended reading
modalities (whole class, partner,
independent).
●
Pause to answer the During
Reading Questions during
reading.
45 total minutes for this lesson
●
●
●
Assign longer chunks of
independent reading.
Skip some supportive During
Reading Questions.
Instruct students to take notes
independently: As you read,
annotate for details the author
uses to explain the definition of
‘community.
’
●
●
●
Put students into partners or
groups of 3-5.
Students answer the During
Reading Questions and alternate
readers to read sections aloud.
Circulate to check for
understanding.
⬆ Recommended!⬆
Unit 1: Community and Belonging
Name Class
TEACHER COPY: What is ‘community’ and why is it important?
Toby Lowe
*Answers in blue. To help us ensure assessment security, please do not post or circulate these answers online.
*
About this Text
Toby Lowe is a professor of public management who works with government and volunteer organizations to find ways of making
public services better. The following text is a summary of Lowe’s PhD centered around the use and misuse of the term
“community.
”
Purpose for Reading Vocabulary
To understand what a community is so that we can build our
understanding about how communities create feelings of both
belonging and rejection.
Let’s pronounce these words together as a class:
Aspect [as-pekt]
Moral [mawr-uhl]
Narrative [nar-uh-tiv]
Specific [ spi-sif-ik]
WHOLE CLASS READING DURING READING QUESTIONS
[1] The word “community” has a strange power to it. It conveys a sense of
togetherness and positivity. It speaks both of solidarity 1
and homeliness. You will,
almost never, hear people say what they mean by “community”
.
What does community mean? And why is it important?
[2] Here are the things that I think a definition of community must be able to
explain in order to reflect the various communities in the world:
●
●
●
●
A definition of community must be able to account for the different types
of communities that exist in the world. For example, it must be able to
account for both a community of place, and something more dispersed,
2
like “the academic community” or “the Islamic community.
”
It must be able to account for the positive feelings that people have
about “community” (e.g. the sense of togetherness), but without saying
that “community” is necessarily good (after all, one of the best examples
of a community is the Mafia, 3
and even with the kindest reading of their
activities, you’d struggle to argue that, on balance, they are a force for
good in the world).
It must be able to explain the sense of identity and belonging associated
with “community.
” It must explain the feeling of pride or hurt we feel
when a community of which we are part is praised or attacked. And it
must explain the “in” group/“out” group nature of this identity — why
some people are part of a particular community, and others are not.
The definition of community must be able to explain why “community”
has the normative (moral) power that it does –– how communities shape
Paragraphs 1-2
A. Think & Share: What claim does Lowe make
about the word “community” in paragraph 1?
●
It is a word that has a lot of power and can
mean different things, but people aren't
always clear with what they think it means.
*B. Write: What is the relationship between the
claim above and the bulleted list in paragraph 2?
●
Lowe lists the things that a good definition of
community should explain.
C. Turn & Talk: Based on the bulleted list,
summarize at least three key traits of a community.
●
●
There are many different kinds of communities.
Communities can create positive feelings of
togetherness and belonging.
●
Communities influence members’ views of
what is good and bad.
●
People can be part of multiple communities.
1 Solidarity (noun): a feeling of unity or togetherness based on a common interest
2 Dispersed (adjective): spread out
3 a criminal organization
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 1
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
●
●
our sense of what ‘good’ and ‘bad’ means. For example, our community
shapes our understanding of what being a good neighbor means — the
shared understanding of how we should treat people around here.
It must be able to explain why “community” is different from other social
groups — such as “society,
” “family,
” or just a group of people.
It must be able to account for the fact that people can be part of
different communities simultaneously.
PARTNER READING DURING READING QUESTIONS
[3] Given that framing, I offer this as my definition of “community”:
A community is a group of people who share an identity-forming narrative.
[4] This means, a group of people who share a story that is so important to them
that it defines an aspect of who they are. Those people build the shared story
archetypes (characters) of that community into their sense of themselves; they
build the history of those communities into their own personal history; and they
see the world through the lens of those shared stories.
[5] So, one of the communities that I consider myself to be part of is the
community based around the city of Newcastle. 4 5
The manifestations of this are
that I take pride in showing people around the city. I feel slighted when people say
horrible things about it. I feel at home whenever I hear a Geordie (Newcastle)
accent (despite not having one myself). And so on.
[6] But what makes me part of this community is my choice to write Newcastle’s
stories into my own story: the character traits for how Geordies are supposed to
behave (be friendly, talk to strangers at bus stops, support Newcastle United, 6
etc.,
etc.) are character traits that I have adopted. I take part in shared events where
this story is played out — such as attending football matches at St. James Park and
other cultural events in the city. I feel that arguments about the future of the city
(should this building be built here? What green spaces does the city need? etc.,
etc.) are arguments about my own future. I see arguments about the UK’s 7
future
through the lens of the future of Newcastle.
[7] It is this choice to participate in the making and remaking of these stories
about the city that makes me part of the community of Newcastle. It’s not just
about where you live, or where you work: it is possible to live and work in
Newcastle without doing these things, without becoming part of this community.
And there are many people who are from Newcastle originally, but who now live
elsewhere, who would still consider themselves part of the Newcastle community
because they still take an active part in conversations about what it means to be a
part of this community.
Paragraphs 3-7:
A. Write: How does Lowe’s example of belonging to
the Newcastle community support his definition?
●
It shows that part of his identity is the shared
story of Newcastle. He acts how people from
there are supposed to act, takes pride in the
community, and chooses to take part in
events that are part of Newcastle’s story.
B. Turn & Talk: Consider the communities you are a
part of. Share how one of these communities fits
Lowe’s definition.
●
Student responses will vary. Students should
discuss the shared story of their chosen
community.
WHOLE CLASS READING DURING READING QUESTIONS
[8] Let’s see how this definition works against the six key criteria for being an
accurate and useful definition of “community”:
●
It can account for all the different kinds of community — what people
call “communities of interest” and “communities of place.
” The essence 8
4 a city in England
5 Manifestation (noun): a sign of something happening
6 an English professional football — or soccer — club
7 abbreviation for the United Kingdom, a European country made up of England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland
8 Essence (noun): the quality that makes something what it is
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 2
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
of community is a shared story — that story can be about a place, or it
can be about a religion, or any other social practice.
●
It can account for the positive feelings people have about being part of a
community. The sense of a shared identity, of being part of something
larger than we are, is well known as a source of good feeling.
Communities can be positive social forces, doing good in the world, and
they can be negative, doing harm (and they can be both of those things
at once). Community is not, in and of itself, morally praiseworthy. It just
is.
●
This definition of community explains the nature of shared identity in
communities, and highlights the specific mechanism 9
by which this
occurs. It is the process of telling a story about yourself that draws on the
shared cultural story archetypes which creates and maintains a shared
identity.
●
It explains why community has the normative (moral) force that it does,
because it is our narratives that provide us with our explanations for
what good/bad look like. A good neighbor is someone who fits the story
we tell ourselves about how a good neighbor behaves, a good colleague
is someone who fits with the archetype of how that character behaves
etc. Our narratives provide our moral framing.
●
It explains why “community” is different from other types of social
groups. A community is a group with a shared identity-forming narrative.
This is different from the set of people who live in a place, or have a
shared interest.
●
The definition understands that people can be part of many communities
simultaneously, and also how they can become part of (and drift away
from) particular communities. It also is able to account for the tension
that people can feel when they are part of multiple communities —
when different aspects of their identity-defining stories clash, for
example.
[9] Community is a group of people who share a story that is so important to
them that it defines an aspect of who they are. Those people build the shared
story archetypes (characters) of that community into their sense of themselves;
they build the history of those communities into their own personal history; and
they see the world through the lens of those shared stories.
Why does this matter?
[10] On one level, this is simply a plea for a more precise use of language. I am not
saying that “community” is the only (or even most important) social grouping, but
it is a particular type of social grouping that explains the strong sense of shared
identity that people feel, and membership of particular groups give us a lens
through which we see the world.
Why ‘community’ is a helpful concept for understanding and creating social
change
[11] I think my key message is that community is an important concept for social
change because it helps us to see that social change requires a change in some of
the most important stories we tell ourselves. Social change requires that we
rewrite our communal narratives. Social change is change in community.
Paragraph 8:
A. Turn & Talk: Refer back to the bulleted list in
Paragraph 2. Why does the author include another
bulleted list in this section?
●
Lowe tests his definition of community
against each of the 6 key traits outlined in
paragraph 2.
B. Write: In your own words, explain at least three
reasons why Lowe thinks his definition that
community is “a shared story” works.
●
A community’s shared story can be based on
place, religion or shared interests.
●
A shared story makes people have positive
feelings of belonging and contributes to their
sense of self.
●
The shared story of a community shapes the
way members see the world. They see things
in a similar way.
●
People can have more than one
identity-forming story so they can be part of
many communities.
Paragraphs 10-11
Find Evidence: The title of this text is “What is
‘community’ and why is it important?” Highlight
two pieces of evidence that answer both questions.
●
“Community is a group of people who share a
story that is so important to them that it
defines an aspect of who they are.
” (10)
●
“community is an important concept for social
change because it helps us to see that social
change requires a change in some of the most
important stories we tell ourselves.
” (12)
"What is 'community' and why is it important?" by Toby Lowe. (c) February 24, 2021, Toby Lowe, www.medium.com. All Rights
Reserved. Used with permission by Toby Lowe.
9 a system or process
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 3
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
Name Class
Independent Practice
Directions: Answer the multiple choice questions for “What is ‘community’ and why is it important?” 5
minutes
Note: To ensure test security, answers to the following assessment items are viewable only on
commonlit.org for verified teacher accounts. Navigate to this reading assignment on the Lessons &
Materials page to gain access.
1. Which best describes the author’s main purpose in writing the article? [RI.6]
A. B. C. D. to illustrate how important it is to be part of multiple communities
to demonstrate the way community has shaped the author's life
to describe the life of a person who lives in Newcastle
to give a clear and useful definition of community
2. Which piece of evidence best illustrates the central idea of the article? [RI.1]
A.
“So, one of the communities that I consider myself to be part of is the community based around the city
of Newcastle.
” (Paragraph 5)
B.
“It is this choice to participate in the making and remaking of these stories about the city that makes me
part of the community of Newcastle.
” (Paragraph 7)
C.
“Community is a group of people who share a story that is so important to them that it defines an aspect
of who they are.
” (Paragraph 9)
D.
“Social change requires that we rewrite our communal narratives.
” (Paragraph 11)
3. Reread the excerpt from paragraph 5:
“The manifestations of this are that I take pride in showing people around the city. I feel slighted when people say
horrible things about it. I feel at home whenever I hear a Geordie (Newcastle) accent (despite not having one
myself).
”
What is the best meaning of the word “slighted” as it is used in the excerpt? [RI.4]
A. bored
B. insulted
C. motivated
D. recognized
4. How do paragraphs 5-7 help the reader understand the author’s central idea? [RI.2]
A. B. C. D. by explaining why community is neither good not bad
by describing life for members of the Newcastle community
by giving an example of a community that is part of the author’s story
by illustrating how the Newcastle community has many different members
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 4
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
Independent Practice
Directions: Answer the short response prompt for “What is ‘community’ and why is it important?” 15
minutes
Note: To ensure test security, a sample answer to the following short response item is viewable only on
commonlit.org for verified teacher accounts. Navigate to this reading assignment on the Lessons &
Materials page to access it.
PROMPT: You have just read “What is community and why is it important?”
by Toby Lowe. Explain what Lowe means when he says a community is “a
group of people who share an identity-forming narrative.
” [RI.2]
Make sure to incorporate relevant unit vocabulary in your writing.
SELF CHECKLIST
Did I…
❏
❏
❏
fully answer the prompt
include at least two details
from the text?
incorporate relevant unit
vocabulary?
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 5
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
Student-Led Discussion
Directions: Discuss the questions with a partner. Record both of your answers to the questions. 5 minutes
1. Consider a community you are part of. What is something that is considered courteous behavior in that
community?
My answer My partner’s answer
2. Do you think it is possible to be a part of a community without conforming to its views? Explain your answer.
My answer My partner’s answer
3. Lowe says that “people can be part of many communities.
” What might be some of the benefits of belonging to
more than one community?
My answer My partner’s answer
Unit 1: Community and Belonging 6
Unless otherwise noted, this content is licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.