(Class) She will help row the boat... [Music] (Female Narrator) For students with disabilities, the right accommodations and modifications can be as important to school success as appropriate IEP goals. These educational supports are similar, but they are not the same. [Music] Accommodations change how a student accesses information, participates in school activities, or demonstrates their learning. They do not change the curriculum. Modifications, however, change what is being taught, or what a student is expected to learn and demonstrate. (Teacher) I only need you to do the circled problems for me... (Narrator) Accommodations can be made by adjusting the amount of work a student must complete, allowing extra time... (Teacher) Just go ahead and turn your paper in. Ok you can go ahead and keep working. You've got about five more minutes. (Narrator) ...adapting assignments... (Teacher) Alex, I have your shapes here. Good! (Narrator) ...providing extra assistance, or changing the physical setting. (Teacher) Let's do one more page today. (Narrator) There is no one set list. Because each child is unique, the IEP team must identify specific strategies to help your child succeed. [Music] For example, presenting a few math problems at a time may help a student who is easily overwhelmed. Another student might benefit from short breaks or being allowed to finish an assignment at home. A student who has difficulty writing may be allowed the use of a computer while students with a print disability may benefit from having tests read aloud. (Teacher) They went downtown. (Narrator) A child can be given an appropriate role when working in small groups. (Actress) Where am I? (Narrator) Or be allowed to participate in an activity in a different way. (Actress) Beware of what? Excuse me! (Narrator) Being seated near the teacher helps some students stay focused. (Teacher) We'll go ahead and discuss these in a minute. (Narrator) And assistive technology can support a wide range of needs. (Teacher) And if you need me, you can raise your hand and I'll come and help you, alright? [Music] (Narrator) In addition to accommodations, it is sometimes necessary to modify the curriculum. For example, when the class is learning how to tell time, one child might be expected to identify only the hours. While the class is working on vocabulary and spelling, another child may work from a shorter list or focus exclusively on the meaning of key words. (Kid) Insects with eight legs. [Music] (Narrator) Parents play a vital role in crafting the IEP. After all, no one knows your child better! So at home, watch for what works and any struggles that continue. Talk to your child about what feels right to him or to her. Make sure the IEP team considers your child's needs throughout the entire school day, including classroom time, non-academic and extracurricular activities, and transportation. You are not expected to have all the answers! Other members of the IEP team will have much to contribute. You can help by making sure that all accommodations and modifications are clearly written into the IEP. Be sure to ask whether any of the modifications will impact your child's graduation. Ask questions, offer ideas, and bring up any concerns you may have. Open dialogue and clear documentation are essential to developing a high quality IEP. (Mother) ...when he gets to middle school. (Father) I didn't know it was this far from the lockers to the busses. (Teacher) During the IEP meeting, we can talk about adding extra time to Sam's schedule. (Father) Oh, ok, great! (Teacher) So we've talked about quite a few modifications today. [Translator speaking in Spanish] [Mother speaking in Spanish] (Translator) She wants to know if there is a limit. (Teacher) No, however, we do want to be careful if we create too many modifications, she may not be able to meet the high school graduation requirements. (Mother) Well I know Tori likes being around other people, but she also has a hard time with conversation. So I was wondering, did you have, you know, any other ideas that might help her with that? (Teacher) Well, we could try a peer buddy or we could work in small groups more often. (Mother) These are great goals, but Brooke's in the 6th grade and is only reading at a 2nd grade level. (Teacher) This is true. But audio books should help her access the content better and I think we might be able to find some textbooks that are at a lower reading level. (Teacher) Tori always turns in her homework but it's not always what was assigned. (Mother) Hmm. Maybe if you could help her get started in class, she'll know she's on the right track. (Teacher) Sure, I could do that. (Father) I'm unclear who will follow up with each of these items. (Teacher 1) I'll handle supports during basic instruction. (Teacher 2) And I'll arrange for the seatbelt and keyboard. (Narrator) Accommodations and modifications should change as your child's needs change. (Teacher) Alright, time for Comprehension. If Comprehension, then iPad. Are you ready? (Narrator) You are not limited to a standard list. [Music] (Girl) Um, can we play? (Narrator) So be creative and stay involved! (Teen) Can we go to the park? (Mother) I would love to go to the park, but you're going to study first, right? (Narrator) Your child is counting on you! (Mother) Thanks for helping each other out. That'll be great... [Music]