Special education has many names. It can also be called SPED, special ed, aided education, alternative provision, exceptional student education, or special day class (SDC). It is the practice of educating students in a way that accommodates their individual differences, disabilities, and special needs.[1] This involves the individually planned and systematically monitored arrangement of teaching procedures, adapted equipment and materials, and accessible settings. These interventions are designed to help individuals with special needs achieve a higher level of personal self-sufficiency and success in school and in their community. This may not be available if the student were only given access to a typical classroom education.

Special education aims to provide accommodated education for students with disabilities such as learning disabilities or difficulties (such as dyslexia), communication disorders, emotional and behavioral disorders, physical disabilities (such as osteogenesis imperfecta, down syndrome, and muscular dystrophy), developmental disabilities (such as autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual disabilities) and other disabilities.[2] Students with disabilities are likely to benefit from additional educational services such as different approaches to teaching, the use of technology, a specifically adapted teaching area, a resource room, or a separate classroom altogether.

In the Western world, educators modify teaching methods, curriculum materials, and environments so that the maximum number of students are served in general education environments.[3][4][5][6][7] Integration can reduce social stigmas and improve academic achievement for many students.[8]

Different kinds of education
Gifted education is sometimes confused with special education. However, it differs from special education because of the students' capabilities. Gifted education is tailored to Intellectual giftedness which is a difference in learning. These students can also benefit from specialized teaching techniques or different educational programs, but the term "special education" is generally used to specifically indicate instruction of students with disabilities.

Whereas special education is designed specifically for students with learning disabilities, remedial education can be designed for any students, with or without special needs. The defining trait is simply that they have reached a point of unpreparedness, regardless of why. For example, if a person's education was disrupted, for example, by internal displacement during civil disorder or a war.

The opposite of special education is general education, also known as mainstream education. General education is the standard curriculum presented without special teaching methods or supports. Sometimes special education classrooms and general special education classrooms mix. This is called an inclusive classroom.

History
See also: Inclusion (education)
Until the early 19th century, children with special needs were often isolated and received no education at all. This was the case until specialized schools began to appear in the United States and Europe.

The civil case Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 was a matter of racial segregation, but it is often used as a reference for when students with special needs are segregated from the general population.[9]

The majority of states in America had programs implemented in public schools for students with special needs by 1930.[10]

The Education of All Handicapped Children Act changed its name to Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, commonly called IDEA in 1975. President Gerald Ford implemented this act. Essentially, the act says, "Children ages 3 to 21 with disabilities must be given access to a 'free and appropriate public education'".[11]

Individual needs
A boy wearing a jacket and a backpack
A six-year-old boy in Norway with Down syndrome is ready for his first day of school.
A special education program should be customized to address each student's needs. Special educators provide a continuum of services, in which students with various disabilities receive multiple degrees of support based on their individual needs. It is crucial for special education programs to be individualized so that they address the unique combination of needs of a given student.[12]

In the United States, Canada, and the UK, educational professionals use a student's Individualized Education Program (IEP). Another name for a student's Individualized Education Plan is a student's Individual Learning Plan (ILP).

"The IEP is meant to address each child's unique learning issues and include specific educational goals. It is a legally binding document [in the US]. The school must provide everything it promises in the IEP."[13]

In the US, for children who are not yet three years old, an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) contains information on the child's present level of development in all areas, outcomes for the child and family, and services the child and family will receive to help them achieve the outcomes.

In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is enforced. To ensure that this federal law is obeyed, the government requires every school system provide this type of education to each student in order to receive federal funding.[14] This changed a little in 2004 when the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) decided to update the law. After the law was updated into the Disabilities Education Improvement Act, the ability to identify special needs children and give them the appropriate education environment was improved.[15]

Students with all forms of special needs are assessed to determine their specific strengths and weaknesses.[12] The earlier these students with special needs are assessed, the faster they get the accommodations that they need, and the better it is for their education.[16] Placement, resources, and goals are determined on the basis of the student's needs. Accommodations and modifications to the regular program may include changes in the curriculum, supplementary aids or equipment, and the provision of specialized physical adaptations that allow students to participate in the educational environment as much as possible.[17] Students may need this help to access subject matter, physically gain access to the school, or meet their emotional needs. For example, if the assessment determines that the student cannot write by hand because of a physical disability, then the school might provide a computer for typing assignments, or allow the student to answer questions verbally instead. If the school determines that the student is severely distracted by the normal activities in a large, busy classroom, then the student might be placed in a smaller classroom such as a separate classroom or resource room.

Parents of students with a learning disability must be aware of what type of disability their child has, so they can get access to accommodations such as speech therapy, occupational therapy, and adaptive physical education. For example, if a student takes an academic test and it indicates that the student struggles with reading comprehension, parents can request speech and language support or classroom accommodations, such as extra time to complete reading and writing tasks.[18]

Methods of provision

Procedure that a person must follow in order to receive special education accommodations
In most developed countries, schools use different approaches to providing special education services to students. These approaches can be broadly grouped into four categories, according to how much contact the student with special needs has with non-disabled students (using North American terminology):

Inclusion: In this approach, students with special needs spend all, or most, of the school day with students who do not have special needs. Due to the fact that inclusion can require substantial modification of the general curriculum, most schools use it only for selected students with mild to moderate special needs, which is accepted as a best practice.[19][20] Some of the modifications include a slow pace of instruction, more breaks, sensory toys, et cetera. Specialized services may be provided inside or outside the regular classroom, depending on the type of service. Students may occasionally leave the regular classroom to attend smaller, more intensive instructional sessions in a separate classroom called a resource room. They may also receive other related services that require specialized equipment and would be disruptive to the rest of the class. Such services include speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, or rehabilitation counseling. They might also leave the regular classroom for services that require privacy, such as counseling sessions with a social worker.[21]
Mainstreaming refers to the practice of educating students with special needs in classes with non-disabled students during specific time periods. This is based on their skills. Students with special needs are segregated in separate classrooms exclusively for adapted education for the rest of the school day.[22][23]
Another method is segregation in a separate classroom or special school for students with special needs. In this model, students with special needs do not attend classes with non-disabled students. Segregated students may attend the same school where regular classes are provided, but they spend all instructional time exclusively in a separate classroom for students with various disabilities. If their special class is located in a typical school, they may be provided opportunities for social integration outside the classroom, such as by eating meals with students without disabilities.[24] Alternatively, these students may attend a special school.[22] It may also occur when a student is in a hospital, housebound, or detained by the criminal justice system. These students may receive one-on-one instruction or group instruction. Students who have been suspended or expelled are not considered segregated in this same sense.
Co-teaching: In this setting, students with special needs are placed in a general education classroom to learn along with their disabled peers and non-disabled peers. A general education teacher and a special education teacher work as partners in instruction. Types of co-teaching include "one teaching/one helping" in which one teacher instructs while the other circulates around the class to evaluate and offer help, "parallel teaching" in which both teachers teach the same content to two groups of students of equal size, "station teaching" in which both teachers present differing content to different groups of students simultaneously and students rotate through each station, "alternative teaching" in which one teacher works with a smaller group or individual students while the other works with the rest of the class, or "team teaching" in which both teachers plan and teach a lesson together.[25]
Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS) is an educational framework increasingly adopted to meet the academic, behavioral, and social-emotional needs of all students, including those receiving special education services. MTSS typically consists of three tiers of support: an educational framework increasingly adopted to meet the academic, behavioral, and social-emotional needs of all students, including those receiving special education services. MTSS typically consists of three tiers of support:
Tier 1: High-quality, universal instruction for all students.

Tier 2: Targeted interventions for students at risk of academic or behavioral challenges.

Tier 3: Intensive, individualized support, often overlapping with special education services.

This approach promotes early identification of needs and reduces inappropriate referrals to special education by providing timely, data-driven support within general education settings. MTSS is also aligned with Response to Intervention (RTI) models and is increasingly integrated with Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) to support inclusive practices across school systems.[26]

Effective instruction for students with disabilities
Goal-directed: Each child must have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) that distinguishes their particular needs. The child must get the services that are designed for them. These services will allow them to reach their annual goals which will be assessed at the end of each term along with short-term goals that will be assessed every few months.
Research-based methods: A lot of research has been conducted on how best to teach students with disabilities. Testing, IQs, interviews, the discrepancy model, et cetera should all be used to determine where to place the child. Once that is determined, the next step is the best way for the child to learn. There are a number of different programs such as the Wilson Reading Program and Direct Instruction.
Guided by student performance: While the IEP goals may be assessed every few months to a year, constant informal assessments must take place. These assessments will guide instruction for the teacher. The teacher will be able to determine if the material is too difficult or too easy.[27]
Special schools

PS 721, a special school in Brooklyn, New York, exclusively for the education of students with special needs
A special school is a school catered for students who have special educational needs due to learning difficulties, physical disabilities, or behavioral problems. Special schools may be specifically designed, staffed, and resourced to provide appropriate special education for children with additional needs. Students attending special schools generally do not attend any classes in mainstream schools.

Special schools provide individualized education with the ability to address specific needs. Student to teacher ratios are kept low, often 6:1 or lower, depending upon the needs of the children. Special schools will also have other facilities for children with special needs, such as soft play areas, sensory rooms, or swimming pools, all of which are necessary for treating students with certain conditions.

In recent times, places available in special schools are declining as more children with special needs are educated in mainstream schools. However, there will always be some children, whose learning needs cannot be appropriately met in a regular classroom setting and will require specialized education and resources to provide the level of support they require. An example of a disability that may require a student to attend a special school is intellectual disability. However, this practice is often frowned upon by school districts in the US in the light of the least restrictive environment as mandated in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.[28]

An alternative is a special unit or special classroom, also called a self-contained classroom, which is a separate classroom dedicated solely to the education of students with special needs within a larger school that also provides general education.[29] This classroom is typically staffed by a specially trained teacher, who provides specific, individualized instruction to individuals and small groups of students with special needs. Separate classrooms, because they are located in a general education school, may have students who remain in the separate classroom full-time, or students who are mainstreamed in certain general education classes. An alternative to the separate classroom full-time for a student would be a one-to-one aide in the general education setting. In the United States, a one-on-one aide for a student with a disability is called a paraprofessional. In the United States a part-time choice that is appropriate for some students is sometimes called a resource room. Another option would be attending a separate classroom for a specific subject such as social studies.

Seclusion is the practice of involuntarily locking a student in an isolated room, utility closet or office alone without the ability to leave until school staff allows. The use of a seclusion room is often misused as a form of punishment for disrespecting staff or leaving the classroom.[30][31][32]

History of special schools
One of the first special schools in the world was the Institut National des Jeunes Aveugles in Paris, which was founded in 1784. It was the first school in the world to teach blind students.[33] The first school in U.K. for the Deaf was established in 1760[34][35] in Edinburgh by Thomas Braidwood, with education for visually impaired people beginning in the Edinburgh and Bristol in 1765.

In the 19th century, people with disabilities and the inhumane conditions where they were supposedly housed and educated were addressed in the literature of Charles Dickens. Dickens characterized people with severe disabilities as having the same, if not more, compassion and insight in Bleak House and Little Dorrit.[36]

Such attention to the downtrodden conditions of people with disabilities brought resulted in reforms in Europe including the re-evaluation of special schools. In the United States, reform came more slowly. Throughout the mid half of the 20th century, special schools, termed institutions, were not only accepted, but they were encouraged. Disabled students were housed with people with mental illnesses, and they were not educated much, if at all.[37]

Deinstitutionalization proceeded in the US beginning in the 1970s following the exposes of the institutions. It has taken some time before the Education for All Handicapped Children's Act of 1974, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Individuals with Disabilities Educational Improvement Act (IDEIA) to come into fruition.[38] School integration was supported as early as the 1970s, and teacher preparation programs in higher education have carefully taught and instructed graduates on inclusion at the individual, classroom, school, and district levels for decades resulting in dual certification of "regular teachers".

With the Amendments to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1997, school districts in the United States began to slowly integrate students with moderate and severe special needs into regular school systems. This changed the form and function of special education services in many school districts and special schools subsequently saw a steady decrease in enrollment as districts weighed the cost per student. It also posed general funding dilemmas to certain local schools and districts, changed how schools viewed assessments, and formally introduced the concept of inclusion to many educators, students and parents.[39]

Instructional strategies

The student can be taught in either a classroom or outside environment. Both environments can be interactive for the student to engage better with the subject.[40] Different instructional techniques are used for some students with special educational needs. Instructional strategies are classified as being either accommodations or modifications.

Accommodation
An accommodation is a reasonable adjustment to teaching practices so that the student learns the same material, but in a format that is more accessible to the student. Accommodations may be classified by whether they change the presentation, response, setting, or scheduling of lessons.[41] For example, the school may accommodate a student with visual impairments by providing a large-print textbook. This is a presentation accommodation.

Examples of accommodations
Response accommodations:[41] typing homework assignments rather than hand-writing them (considered a modification if the subject is learning to write by hand) or having someone else write down answers given verbally
Presentation accommodations:[41] listening to audiobooks rather than reading printed books (these may be used as substitutes for the text, or as supplements intended to improve the students' reading fluency and phonetic skills), designating a person to read to the student, or providing text to speech software (this is considered a modification if the purpose of the assignment is reading skills acquisition), designating a person to take notes during lectures, or using a talking calculator rather than one with only a visual display
Setting accommodations:[41] taking a test in a quieter room, moving the class to a room that is physically accessible (e.g., on the first floor of a building or near an elevator), arranging seating assignments to benefit the student (e.g., by sitting at the front of the classroom)
Scheduling accommodations:[41] rest breaks or extended time on tests (may be considered a modification, if speed is a factor in the test), use a timer to help with time management, students with a disability that can flare up unexpectedly may be allowed to turn in an assignment or take a test shortly after the episode has resolved[42], (this system, called flexible deadlines, treats an occasional, unexpected episode of illness or incapacity caused by a disability similar to an equivalent episode of an unexpected viral infection, these students or their families should inform the teachers of the problem and turn in the missed work soon after the student is well enough to return to school- typically, one to three days after the return to class).[42]
Students can be offered a flexible setting in which to take tests. These settings can be a new location to provide for minimal distractions.
All developed countries permit or require some degree of accommodation for students with special needs, and special provisions are usually made in examinations which take place at the end of formal schooling.[41]

Modification
A modification changes or adapts the material to make it simpler.[43] Modifications may change what is learned, how difficult the material is, what level of mastery the student is expected to achieve, how the student is assessed if at all, or any other aspect of the curriculum.[44] For example, the school may modify a reading assignment for a student with reading difficulties by substituting a shorter, easier book. A student may receive both accommodations and modifications.

Examples of modifications
Skipping subjects: students may be taught less information than typical students- skipping over material that the school deems inappropriate for the student's abilities or less important than other subjects (for example, students with poor fine motor skills may be taught to print block letters, but not cursive handwriting)
Simplified assignments: students may read the same literature as their peers but have a simpler version, such as Shakespeare with both the original text and a modern paraphrase available[45]
Shorter assignments: students may do shorter homework assignments or take shorter tests
Extra aids: if students have deficiencies in working memory, a list of vocabulary words, called a word bank, can be provided during tests, to reduce lack of recall and increase chances of comprehension, students might use a calculator when other students do not
Extended time: students with a slower processing speed may benefit from extended time for assignments and tests in order to have more time to comprehend questions, recall information, and synthesize knowledge
Non-academic services
In addition to how the student is taught the academic curriculum, schools may provide non-academic services to the student. These are intended ultimately to increase the student's personal and academic abilities. Related services include developmental, corrective, and other supportive services as are required to assist a student with learning disabilities. These services include, but are not limited to, speech and language pathology, audiology, psychological services, physical therapy, occupational therapy, counseling services, or music therapy.[46] In some countries, most related services are provided by the schools. In other countries, they are provided by the normal healthcare and social services systems.

As an example, students who have poor impulse control, behavioral challenges, or are autistic may learn self-management techniques, be kept closely on a comfortingly predictable schedule, or be given extra cues to signal activities.[47]

An educational field, termed severe disabilities, is taught throughout the US university sector in schools. Advanced instruction is based upon community-referenced instruction, and alignment with transition to adulthood and progressive community practices.[48]

Rehabilitation counseling personnel are often association with supported employment services, and typically with "transition to adulthood"[49][50] in which multi-decade recommendations for better coordination between the school and the community service sectors have been made at the federal and university levels.

Integrating technology in special education classrooms
Autism
Autism, or Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), refers to a range of conditions. These conditions involve challenges with social skills, repetitive behaviors, speech and nonverbal communication. They also involve unique strengths and differences.

Autism is a disability that impairs the social interactions and communication skills of a person. People who are autistic tend to think and act differently from others. Many autistic children find themselves comfortable with a device in their hands.[citation needed][51][52] For students with autism, there are apps called "visual scene displays" that are most helpful for children who are having difficulty with verbal skills, according to Jules Csillag, a speech–language pathologist who focuses on special ed tech. Apps such as SceneSpeak and Speech with Milo help autistic children develop storytelling skills with text-to-speech voice and interactive storybooks. Using apps like these in a classroom can improve autistic student's verbal skills.[53]

There are several controversies surrounding the diagnoses and causes of autism. It is now believed that there is no single cause of autism. Research seems to suggest that autism is normally the result of both genetic and environmental influences.[54]

Down syndrome
If a student has Down syndrome, assistive technology can help with their learning experience. Author of Down Syndrome: A Promising Future, Together, Terry Hassold, who got his PhD in human genetics, explains that students with Down syndrome have delays with cognitive ability. Their brains have a late reaction when their neurological system sends a message for any task. Because of this late reaction, they tend to take longer to complete a task than an average student.[55] Assistive technology is crucial in helping students with Down syndrome with their writing ability. Children with Down syndrome tend to have shorter fingers and a lowered thumb making their ability to write more difficult. Also, some of the usual wrist bones are not formed, making it difficult to hold objects. Slanted desks are one type of assisted technology that can aid in the successful ability to write. A three-ring binder can be used to create a slanted desk by turning the binder sideways. Also, students with Down syndrome often try to hold their pencils by anchoring them against the thumb rather than using the tip of their thumb. Shortened pencils or triangular-shaped pencils encourage students to hold them correctly. Using any of these assistive technologies can help students with Down syndrome during their educational process.[56]

Special education and sports
Benefits
Many people with special needs are denied when they want to participate in a sport.[57] In the U.S., the Office for Civil Rights ensures students with disabilities always have opportunities to participate in extracurricular athletics equal to other students.[58] Special education students can benefit from sports in many ways. For example, studies show it boosts self confidence and improves the participant's skills in relationship building and working as part of a team.

Types of sports
Almost any sport can be altered for individuals with special needs[59] Some of the popular sports are swimming, wheelchair soccer, handball, gymnastics, surf therapy, and weightlifting.[59][60]

Organizations and programs
Many competitive organizations are available for special needs student-athletes. For example, the Special Olympics is an annual, world-wide competition held for intellectually disabled children that want to participate in sports.[61] Other organizations include the Paralympic Games and Unified Sports, the latter of which pairs participants with and without intellectual disabilities on the same team.[62][63] Educational institutions can also promote Adapted Physical Education, which tailors sports for students with certain disabilities. Organizations like S.T.R.I.D.E. Adaptive Sports help educational institutions in providing opportunities for special education student athletes.[64] Some of these sports might include wheelchair basketball or sledge hockey.

Some sports even have their own organizations. For example, in baseball, athletes can participate in the Miracle League or Little League Challenger Division. Another organization that athletes can participate in is the US Youth Soccer TOPSoccer or Just for Kicks.[65]

Other sports which can be played or adapted include track and field, quad rugby, tennis, bowling, and skiing.[66]

Identifying students or learners with special needs
Some children are easily identified as candidates for special needs due to their medical history. For example, they may have been diagnosed with a genetic condition that is associated with intellectual disability, may have various forms of brain damage, may have a developmental disorder, may have visual or hearing disabilities, or other disabilities.

On the other hand, for students with less obvious disabilities, such as those who have borderline intellectual disability or specific learning difficulties (dyslexia, dyscalculia, etc.), two primary methods have been used for identifying them: the discrepancy model and the response to intervention model.[67] The discrepancy model depends on the teacher noticing that the students' achievements are noticeably below what is expected, at which point the teacher may make the decision for the student to receive support from a special education specialist. Before doing so, the teacher must show documentation of low academic achievement. The response to intervention model advocates early intervention.

In the discrepancy model, a student receives special education services for a specific learning difficulty (SLD) if the student has at least normal intelligence but the student's academic achievement is below what is expected of a student with his or her IQ. Although the discrepancy model has dominated the school system for many years, there has been substantial criticism of this approach (e.g., Aaron, 1995, Flanagan and Mascolo, 2005) among other researchers. One reason for criticism is that diagnosing SLDs on the basis of the discrepancy between achievement and IQ does not predict the effectiveness of treatment. Low academic achievers who also have low IQ's appear to benefit from treatment just as much as low academic achievers who have normal or high intelligence. This is because, while specific diagnoses may not be discovered, certain discrepancies can be identified early on, thus giving students the opportunity to receive early intervention.[68]

The alternative approach, response to intervention, identifies children who are having difficulties in school in their first or second year after starting school. They then receive additional assistance such as participating in a reading remediation program. The response of the children to this intervention then determines whether they are designated as having a learning disability or otherwise. Those few who still have trouble may then receive designation and further assistance. Sternberg (1999) has argued that early remediation can greatly reduce the number of children meeting diagnostic criteria for learning disabilities. He has also suggested that the focus on learning disabilities and the provision of accommodations in school fails to acknowledge that people have a range of strengths and weaknesses and places undue emphasis on academics by insisting that students should be supported in this area and not in music or sports.[69]

Teaching Strategies for Students With Special Needs
Positive Action Staff•Special Education
In the United States, special education is free in the public education system, thanks to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).
Special education ensures students with learning disabilities receive specialized instruction designed to meet their unique learning needs. That way, they too get an opportunity to reach their full academic potential.

For students with special needs, inclusion means everything because they thrive in the presence of their peers.

How? Through their interactions. Students who receive special education can forge friendships in a supportive environment where they learn positive behaviors.

This is where we come in.

At Positive Action, we recognize the unique value of each person. With that in mind, we equip students with special needs with the essential skills needed to integrate into mainstream classrooms.

See lesson summary here: Lesson 406: How to Teach Grade 1 Students Empathy

“I am very grateful for these lessons. They fulfill a need that so many children are lacking in the educational process today.”
— Linda Davis, 2nd Grade Teacher, Davis Elementary

What Is the Purpose of Special Education?
Special education is an intentional intervention designed to mitigate the challenges that keep students with learning disabilities from understanding concepts.

The three types of special education interventions are:

Preventive Interventions: This form of special education aims to either stop something from happening or reduce a condition that has been identified. For instance, preventing manic episodes in students with bipolar disorder by maintaining a specific schedule.
Remedial Interventions: The main goal here is to eliminate the effects of a disability by equipping students with the skills that allow them to function on their own successfully. For instance, teaching students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) to develop an entry point into activities, improving their level of task initiation.
Compensatory Interventions: This entails providing students with learning disabilities with a special device that non-disabled children do not need. For instance, giving a child with autism a phonetic spelling software designed to automatically convert the student’s typing into the word they intended to write.
How to Adapt Your Teaching Strategies for Students With Special Needs
Ready Students for Upcoming Lessons
Discuss and establish learning expectations. Let students know what they’ll learn during the lesson and how much time they’ll need for each activity.
What you can say:
“Today, we’ll discuss (specify the topic), and afterwards, we’ll do (describe the activity).”
Discuss and establish behavioral expectations. Describe how students are expected to behave during the lesson.
Some expectations you can set:
“Talk quietly to your neighbors during seatwork.”
“Raise your hand if you need anything from me.”
Provide the schedule in advance. Summarize your lesson plan so everyone is on the same page.
What you can say:
“After we review the lesson, we will break into group work. Then, you will have some personal reading time.”
Be very clear on the materials needed for the lesson. Let students prepare beforehand, so they feel ready and confident in engaging with the lesson.
What you can say:
“We will need (enumerate the materials needed) for this lesson, so please make sure you have them.”
Conducting Effective Lessons
Use effective instruction to ensure that students engage with the lessons with willingness and interest.

Review the Previous Lesson
If you covered how to regroup in subtraction in the last lesson, review several problems before jumping into the current lesson.

Emphasize key points by using worksheets to highlight keywords in the instructions for students with special needs to focus on.

If you’re unable to highlight before the lesson, simply underline keywords as you and the students go through the instructions together.

During reading sessions, get students to note down key sentences on a separate piece of paper before asking for a summary of the entire book.

In math problem statements, show students how to underline the important facts and operations. For instance, consider the following statement: "If Mary possesses two apples and John possesses three." In this case, you should underline the words 'two' and 'three' to emphasize their significance.

Help the Student Participate During the Lesson
Agree on special cues for students with special needs to help them stay focused and prepare to answer questions when called upon. It could be something as simple as a light pat on the back or a sticky note on their desk.

Don’t rush your students with special needs. Try to ask them probing questions only after they’ve had enough time to solve an equation.

Wait at least 15 seconds before giving the answer or picking another student, then ask follow-up questions so that students can demonstrate their understanding.

Steer clear of sarcasm and criticism — this brings attention to differences between students with learning disabilities and their classmates, ultimately having a detrimental effect on the self-concept development of the former group.

Utilize a variety of audiovisual materials to present academic lessons. For example, when teaching students how to solve fractions, you can use a wooden apple divided into quarters and a pear divided into halves.

Help Students Focus
As the lesson proceeds, share gentle reminders with students to keep working on their assigned tasks.

At this point, you can also remind students of the behavioral expectations you set at the beginning of the lesson.

Break down assignments into smaller, less complex tasks. For example, allow students to complete five math problems before presenting them with the remaining five problems.

Implement group work as a way for students to maximize their own and each other’s learning abilities. Think-Pair-Share is an excellent tool to get you started:

Ask students to reflect on a topic for a few minutes.
Request that they partner up and discuss their thoughts.
Get everyone to engage and share ideas as a collective.
Also, keep an eye out for difficulty in reading comprehension or daydreaming. Provide these students with extra explanations, or request a classmate to serve as a peer tutor for the lesson.

Check Student Performance
Question individual students with special needs to gauge their mastery of the lesson’s content.

For example, as students do their seatwork (i.e., lessons completed by students at their desks in the classroom), ask them to:

Demonstrate the formula they used to arrive at the answer to a math problem.
Share their own thoughts on how the main character of a story felt in a specific chapter.
Use these moments to help students with special needs correct their own mistakes, such as sharing tips on checking calculations for math problems and avoiding spelling errors.

Avoid high-pressure and timed tests when it comes to students with special needs. These situations don’t allow them to demonstrate the full scope of their knowledge due to their potential time blindness. More time to complete quizzes means minimal test anxiety.

Provide Follow-Up Directions
After instructing the entire class, provide additional oral directions for a student with special needs. For instance, ask them whether they understood the directions and repeat them together.
Provide follow-up directions in writing. For example, write the page number and details for an assignment on the chalkboard, then remind the student to look at the chalkboard if they forget the assignment.
Concluding Lessons
Let students know when the lesson is about to end, preferably 5 or 10 minutes beforehand.
Go over assignments with students to gauge their understanding and offer pointers on how to prepare for the next lesson.
Let students know what to expect in the next lesson. For example, instruct them to put away their textbooks and prepare for a group selling session in front of the class.